foreign
and welcome to this episode of spirit
plant medicine presents my name is Mark
Curran I'm I'm happy to share that today
we are having a great conversation uh
with a great group of guests in regards
to Stephen Gray's new book How
psychedelics can help save the world and
today we're going to answer the question
you know what is the role of
psychedelics for a planet in transition
so our first guest I'll introduce is my
friend and cohort in the spirit plant
medicine Space Mr Stephen gray Steven
has been traveling spiritual and
Medicine path for over 50 years now he's
a writer educator conference organizer
speaker and he's also
um a facilitator for cannabis ceremonies
now Stephen is the author of three books
including the popular cannabis and
spirituality and Explorer's Guide to the
ancient plant Spirit allies and uh just
recently as I just already mentioned how
psychedelics can help save the world uh
Visionary and Indigenous voices speak
out Stephen always a pleasure to see you
thanks Mark yeah looking forward to our
conversation today and we also have
joining us is Belinda oracio I hope I
pronounced your last name aracho eracho
um and she's of uh Dyne Navajo and
ashiwi of the Pebbles Pueblo Zuni
descent
her maternal Clan is the one who walks
around and she was born for the Zuni
Pueblo people Belinda has was born and
raised in the Navajo reservation located
in Arizona in the United States she's a
wisdom carrier healer and founder of
kalaji and she's focused on cultural and
traditional teachings
um that impact topics such as Native
American communities she holds a health
degrees
technology and public health Belinda's
just well-rounded in so many different
areas and she brings great wisdom to our
community so we're excited to have you
here again today Belinda nice to see you
great to see you
awesome and of course we have Chris
beige Chris bash is a professor emeritus
in the department of philosophy and
religious studies at Youngstown State
University where he's taught for 33
years he's also a junked faculty
um at the California Institute of
integral studies and a fellow at The
Institute of noetic Sciences he's an
award-winning teacher with his work
exploring the philosophical implications
of non-ordinary states of consciousness
Chris has written a number of books in
his most recent is LSD and the minds of
the universe great read if you haven't
read it go check out that book it's
fantastic welcome Chris how are you I'm
great welcome everybody it's a real
honor to be here with you today yeah
likewise it's always a pleasure to
connect and and learn from you folks
because for me you know this work is has
really been a passion of learning and
the things that I've gleaned uh from all
the talks over the conferences of the
years has really made a difference in my
life and it's really exciting to be able
to share that with people around the
world so thank you for taking the time
out of your day uh to join us here and
we're going to get started and I'm going
to start with Stephen basically what
we're going to do today is we're I'm
going to ask a question of our panel and
they're all each going to answer uh for
about five minutes or so the answer to
this one specific question and because
uh we're focusing on the book How
psychedelics can help save the world I'm
going to start with Stephen gray because
he was the the guy who put this uh work
together and we're gonna start there so
if we're ready gang let's roll the
question is
in your view Mr Stephen gray what is the
role of psychedelics for a planet in
transition oh thanks Mark thanks for the
intro and the lead in oh and just a
quick clarification uh by the way
um although you implied it in your
latest little statement there
um I am merely the uh editor and one of
the contributors to both the previous
cannabis book and this one and in this
case there are 25 contributors so all I
just wrote the intro and the outro as it
were and a couple of other short things
so that's my role I just wanted to
clarify that um and the rest of it was
cat hurting
um for the other 25 people involved
um but uh I'm delighted with uh with the
results uh they're all remarkable people
and they're all speaking in different
ways but I would say in accord I I don't
think there would be anything in the
book that would provoke any one of those
contributors to disagree with any of the
other contributors
um so obviously that's a big question
and I actually think that uh
um uh I'm actually more interested in
what Chris and Belinda have to say about
it than what I have to say about it to
be honest
but so what can I say about that issue
well
well Stephen okay I know I have an
answer for you but go ahead Mark yeah
what I was going to say is maybe you can
let us know what inspired you to put
this particular uh book together and
what that inspiration was for you
based on the title right okay well I'm
gonna take that question and run down
the field maybe the opposite direction
but we'll see
um uh excuse me so yeah well the
inspiration is the potential of
psychedelics which is answering your
question anyway I hope
um and uh so uh here's one way of
talking about it uh the role of
psychedelics for a planet in transition
they are not silver bullets or Magic
Bullets
um they are fraught with the potential
for misuse misappropriation
misunderstanding and in some cases harm
they're not for everybody
um uh and in fact Jamie wheel who's
spoken at our conference twice had an uh
interesting kind of template that he
suggested he said don't take it too
literally but
um perhaps it might be like this uh out
of the if you take a a graph of 100 of
the demographic of the people perhaps
there's ten percent people ten percent
of those people at one end of the
Continuum should never take psychedelic
um for a variety of reasons you know
mental health fragility Etc
um and then there are um ten percent of
the other end who are the dedicated
serious Psychonauts and explorers who
are constantly learning from these
medicines and so those people might be
taking the medicines frequently over you
know accumulated number of years and
then there are 80 percent in the middle
who in Jamie's view perhaps should only
be taking the psychedelics for very
special occasions perhaps three or four
times in their lives
um you know for like a graduation a
wedding the birth of a first child
something like that so that's just one
way of looking at you know who might
benefit or not from the psychedelics
having said that my other sort of
favorite way to talk about these uh or
put them into the context of our current
situation is that
um you know there's a there's an obvious
notion that
um uh using the more sort of a medical
metaphor that when the patient is in an
advanced state of illness strong
medicines are required so as
obviously all through all four of us
here understand quite clearly we are in
a dire condition on the planet and as
Chris beige has made so clear in his
books and talks and different things
like that we are heading into uh sorry
to steal your thunder here Chris but a
death rebirth cycle which is most likely
to become increasingly more difficult on
the material Level over the next decades
we don't know how long so things are uh
uh we're in a crucial moment we're in a
crucial Nexus moment and so what we need
is I understand it is
um we need
um tools that can uh almost in a sense
Shock the Monkey or wake us up up do a
lot of healing work and you know
Awakening work so in that regard the way
that I like to think of the psychedelics
is as reality medicines they're not
about escaping into some alternative
reality particularly although that's a
fraught you know thing to say I suppose
but ultimately
what they're capable of when they're
done in the most skillful intentional
circumstances I think is they can open
us up into
understandings which are real uh you
know about our who we are the nature of
things and that includes uh well another
way that I like to talk about them as
well is uh I think of psychedelics as
having sort of uh two interwoven
capabilities one is the they are truth
serums potentially so they can show us
things about our ourselves uh so that we
can see where we are blocked where the
obstacles are we can see sometimes into
our past and the places we've got stuck
or turned away from ourselves as Gabor
mate might say
um and then the other side of that it's
part of the same function of course and
as I say interwoven is that they can
ideally open us up to what my old
Buddhist teacher took him trungpo would
call unconditioned reality the awakened
state to some degree or another
and as people that take psychedelics off
and say it these states often feel more
real than the ones that most people live
through most of the time so I think I'll
stop there
hmm
well thank you Stephen so before we get
into any kind of conversation I'm going
to pass it to Belinda to from her
perspective and her world view to answer
really the same question you know what
is do you feel is the role of
psychedelics for our planet in
transition thank you Mark
um before I get started I do want to do
a land acknowledgment
um to the people of the Phoenix area
which are the otam de piposh before
McDowell Yavapai nation and the auction
people who live in this place that they
refer to as Earth doctor I'm here as an
invited guest in these unseated
territories and I share a common history
with them and I wanted to acknowledge
them in that way
um before I answer that question that's
a that's a loaded question mark
I um you know in my chapter uh chapter
five that talks about turning of the
soil I use that as a as a metaphor for
what is unfolding in this time that we
are in right now and to me the way that
I look at psychedelics I I view them
more as sacred medicines not necessary
psychedelics or ednogens or drugs as as
many people refer to them and I think
that really puts in perspective itself
um the language that we use when we
refer to these sacred medicines
um you know everything that we do we
create energy or we transform energy and
it's really important that we clearly
understand them and respect them as my
friend Stephen had indicated
but I think also psychedelics is really
an opportunity to awaken to ourselves I
was reading um some literature the other
day about the intellect the intellectual
quotient and the spiritual quotient just
you know on a global level for Humanity
and kind of where we are and it seems
that we've
um outgrown our
intellectual selves and now the
spiritual peace the spiritual aspect of
ourselves is starting to unfold and when
my metaphor that I talk about the
Turning of the soil what I believe is
happening with the um psychedelics it's
essentially turning ourselves inside out
you know we're so used to being out in
the material world from a western
perspective that we've forgotten how to
even be with ourselves and so by
unfolding and taking these different
medicines it allows us to to go into
these places that we can eventually heal
our cells and then resonate that out
into our families and our communities
I also believe that psychedelic
medicines or sacred medicines
um meet different aspects in our lives
you know my culture we talk about the
cycles of life when we are born into
this physicalness we come in in a spirit
physical form
um and it is not until we make our first
lap that we embody the physicalness as
human beings and then we go through
adolescence adulthood elderliehood and
then we return back to source and I
think through those experiences we go
through a path that I refer to as Hojo
which means the balance of of Harmony in
our lives now that doesn't necessarily
mean that everything is nice and Rosy
you know life is life you know and
sometimes those difficult experiences
that we go through allow us to unfold
and to see things in a different
perspective but also give us some life
lessons that we need
um to learn
um and and so with that I think one of
of the things is that in my book I also
make reference to the Prophecies of the
eagle and Condor and I give two examples
one is from the Hopi people which are
located here in Arizona as well as the
Andean traditions and that the north
people of the north are the people of
the mind and the people of the south of
the people of the heart and when we can
come together
um as as one unified Community then we
can start to heal the history that we
all share and so I think psychedelics
allows us to to get to that point but
also come to a lot of other realizations
about our interconnectedness with one
another
um you know the importance of ceremony
and intention
that come along with with these sacred
plant medicines but also the realization
of going to a much deeper level in our
healing Evolution if you will you know I
I think a lot of times when we have an
illness we rely on Western medicine for
that healing aspect rather than going to
that next level deeper within
um and so those are just some of my
thoughts in in the way that I view
psychedelics and how it can save the
world
beautiful well thank you so much for for
sharing that and I just wanted to let
people know that uh if you want to catch
Belinda's talk from our spirit plant
medicine conference in 2022 which is
titled turning of the soil uh that's
available uh on our YouTube channel and
it's also available uh for free in our
membership portal as well at
spiritplantmedicine.com
I highly recommend going and taking that
in because it was just a fantastic
presentation
and as we move forward we're going to go
to Mr Chris bash Chris again the
question is in your view what do you
feel is the role of psychedelics for our
planet in transition
well first Mark I want to affirm
everything that Stephen and Belinda have
said one of the advantages of going last
in the batting order is I get to play
off of what has already been said and I
certainly absolutely agree with it
uh it seems that we are living in a
different time in history uh as
particularly Belinda has pointed to
we're living in a time when the
underlying structure of the collective
psyche is Shifting we are shifting
culturally there are so many cultural
migrations and Integrations taking place
but kind of at a deeper at a deep level
uh the very nature of the collective
psyche seems to be
simmering turning to the point of
boiling one of the ways I understand
this is that we have entered a time when
the karma of our many many former lives
all of us collectively is coming forward
and pressing up inside us seeking
resolution I think there's a a
tremendous Collective purification
taking place in the outer world and also
in the inner world so one of the uses of
psychedelics that can be very helpful is
to helping is to help accelerate and
deepen and clarify this internal
purification process
I think that's why so many people are
involved in other spiritual practices
besides psychedelic practice of yoga and
meditation so many different activities
because we need to keep the psyche open
and clear to let this this negative
conditioning come through us without
without
re-traumatizing ourselves to help our
system clear itself and cleanse itself
and psychedelics when used
conscientiously in ritual context and in
therapeutic context
can deepen and accelerate the this
healing process
and I think one of the fundamental
problems that we have been living with
is our separation from nature and our
separation from our spiritual nature so
that the surface of our nature is not as
naturally in tune with our deeper nature
as maybe it had been in earlier times
simpler times so one of part of healing
the psyche is also sort of healing the
Soul at a deeper level than just kind of
personal therapeutic healing helping the
soul enter into deeper communion with
its own deep history and with the Deep
history of the planet and with the Deep
history of the intelligence that has
been orchestrating reality in
manifesting reality for 13.7 billion
years so that in addition to taking the
healing process deeper than just
personal healing even deeper than
Collective healing it's can be a process
of reconnecting with that core
intelligence that is manifesting life
manifesting nature and manifesting
history
and learning from it
developing a deeper understanding from
life itself what is happening what is
taking place why is this Century
different from earlier centuries what is
the trajectory
of our evolutionary project
excuse me
in this century
so healing
facilitating uh a kind of cultural
Renaissance
but then also facilitating a deeper
psychospiritual Renaissance so that we
can reconnect with this core sense
this deeper understanding of what's
actually taking place in history so
those are the those are the points that
I would just add to what's already been
said
it's fantastic and absolutely as we go
through what transition we're facing but
I wanted to just take this moment as we
go into you know the next question so we
can unpack this a little bit more
Belinda you said something really I
think important and profound that we all
need to you know take a look at and
understand and this is mostly you know
kind of my perception and something that
I've been picking up because you talked
about the language and how we talk about
psychedelics antheogens drugs plant
medicines and things and you know I've
had the opportunity to speak to a lot of
people in terms of interviews and you
know media and things and everybody
talks about them as drugs and I just
want to share my thought on this because
when we take a look at a natural plant
and a plant medicine whether it's
cannabis the mushroom
Ayahuasca and things of that nature
you know in my opinion they're not drugs
they're they're plants and plants as
medicine and when we take a look at you
know
other plants that we consume on a
regular basis we don't call them drugs
broccoli we don't call a drug celery we
don't call it drug you know all those
power foods and power grains we don't
call a drug yet they have different
plant properties and when we look at you
know the Psychedelic nature of plants
you know they have different plant
properties and that's why I think it's
really important that we don't classify
them in that stigma of being a drug and
that we use all plants as medicine and
it's just my two cents on that because
it comes up a lot where people will call
them drugs and in my opinion they're
they're really plants right and many of
them have their own medicine whether
it's a vegetable or something with
psychedelic psychoactive properties so I
I think there's one thing that's missing
from that Mark and
um you know I too have been talking with
many people and I think one of the
things that seems to be missing is the
relationship between us and and the
plants and the plant kingdom um you know
from my culture I refer to
Ayahuasca as grandmother translate to
grandmother Ayahuasca these are these
are ancient teachers that really have
something to pass on to us if we're
willing to listen and to open up to
those
um you know gems of wisdom
um the same thing goes with the Mushroom
Kingdom you know they're not called
santanino for no reason at all you know
the holy children you know and so I
think it really is important that for
those of us that use psychedelics
whether it's in our healing or as
therapeutic modalities is you really
need to come to that inner standing not
understanding we're not putting
ourselves over these plants we're really
internalizing that and really making
that building that relationship with
them and I think it's really important
as this um you know this whole field
starts to develop
so thank you for that Mark yeah
absolutely and I love that word inner
standing I I hope to use that in the
future if you don't mind yes please do
please do awesome not copyrighted yeah
fantastic but it's just it makes sense
and inner standing is very different
than an intellectual understanding right
so yeah beautifully said so now the
question is what is the transition you
think that we're facing you know there's
a lot of change in the world right now
we're seeing it every day Stephen what
do you think is you know the biggest
part of this transition that we're
facing what is it
well
um yeah well again
um
not to belittle my own intelligence but
I think Chris bash has been tapping into
what I think if I may say so Chris uh I
think it's more or less the correct uh
terminology that vast intelligences of
the universe that have been saying that
uh as Chris has said before numerous
times you know we've reached this kind
of Nexus point
um and so
um uh I think it's just really important
now okay so yeah here's here's a good
way to talk about that I think
um
uh as if we think it will and is seems
to be apparently underway already the
stability of the the past or the status
quo such as it is or was
um is becoming less viable less uh
comfortable uh on the material Level and
just in general you know change is
happening very very quickly on multiple
levels uh as that happens and uh
especially if things become
well either rapidly or not quite so
rapidly more difficult for many people
on the material Level like if there
become shortages of food or clean water
if International agreements break down
uh if the climate makes uh makes us put
like a much greater percentage of our
financial resources Into Climate Change
mitigation uh and on and on if those
things all make our lives more difficult
and less stable and less certain I guess
you could say
what I think is likely to happen and I
mean I don't know I'm not an authority
any more than anyone else but it seems
to me that it's a lot of it's already
happening in terms of its effect on the
psychology or the mentality of people
you know you keep hearing in the news
about how there's more
um depression these days there's more
anxiety
um uh so I think what's likely to happen
if this trajectory unfolds the way we
envision it the way we think it will
um
um or perhaps the way the spirits are
telling some people that it is likely to
there will be more of those
um you know problematic mind States and
more discouragement so
um uh I think it's really important and
this is saying this partly because
that's the mission of the book is to
hopefully give people
um uh as Dwayne Elgin one of the
contributors to the books as a a
believable story
um a story that's um if I had it in
front of me actually I I could find it
in a minute but none I don't want to
make you wait he in his chapter in the
book he lays out sort of if the story is
going to be functional for people it has
to have four elements and I don't
remember what they all are now but one
is that it's got to be simple easy to
understand functional able to be you
know put into place manifested plausible
Etc
um and so Dwayne Dwayne has a really
interesting view of this from my point
of view he he talks about how in in his
book choosing Earth he actually he
actually goes through a possible or even
probable scenario for the next six seven
decades and uh this is super loose and I
haven't even read it for a while so it's
something vaguely like this it looks
like material conditions are likely to
continue to deteriorate over the next
several decades but this is really key
um if enough people get smart or however
you want to say that you know wake up do
the healing work that they need to do we
need to do so that we can participate in
um in intelligent Creative Solutions at
multiple levels you know um whatever
level that is through the Arts through
government through economics whatever
environmental work etc etc but starting
with that inner understanding or that
understanding
um uh that Belinda and now you are
talking about Mark
then there is the hope of as Dwayne
calls it uh the birth or the arising of
a mature planetary civilization so
um uh and and Chris again if I you don't
mind my stealing your thunder Chris has
said that he wasn't given any timeline
on this Dwayne lays it out over the next
six or seven decades as a possibility
um but um so uh what I'm really trying
to say in this somewhat rambly way here
is that uh I I feel strongly that people
need to hear messages that
um
uh things if things look bad it doesn't
just mean we're heading toward doom and
destruction it me it means um and this
is really a gross oversimplification no
doubt but for the short term for this
situation here it it's it's connected to
the uh things like the prophecy of the
eagle and the Condor that Belinda was
talking about or or
um you know the the uh hundreds of
thousands of years accumulated Karma
that Chris is talking about coming to a
head now
um it's related to that it's all about
that notion that we've come to this
point and if we if we don't have
something that shows us a potential for
the light to come through it's going to
be much much harder on people's psyches
you know so uh I think that is
I mean maybe I'm an idealist you know
I'm a dreamer I'm a I'm a visioner in
that sense
um I I think we've been given this um I
don't just think it I'm I sense that
we've been given this absolutely
incredible Gift of Life on this planet
um to to wake up to uh our true
interwoven embedded uh interrelationship
and connection to everything and to
appreciate it and to love it and to
create within it you know in this short
time that each of us has on the planet
you know my old Buddhist teacher Chuck
him Trump you know talked about learning
to appreciate the redness of red and the
blueness of blue you know just that
really simple like in a sense
surrendering or open opening oneself
into things as they are and relaxing
into that right
um so
um we just need I think more and more
clear plausible actionable information
and messages that there is this
potential for the birth of uh individual
and Collective Awakening
um so I guess that's one way of talking
about you know whatever this transition
is that is no longer sustainable to keep
being in the state of spiritual
disconnection
I completely understand and agree with
what you're saying there because there's
you know so much going on in the world
right now that you know we need these
tools more than ever so Belinda I'm
really curious about your take of what
you see from your uh role in the world
as an indigenous woman
um on what you see uh as being the
biggest transition that we are facing is
you know Global Humanity right thank you
so much for that question I um I was
looking at uh rereading Chris's chapter
and then some of the things that
um Stephen had talked about but I I look
at things in a different way because I
think what's happening to us and many
indigenous cultures around the globe
um our elders have have told us that
these are just cycles that we're going
through everything is evolving to that
and that's the way that I I look at
things and so these things that may
appear as challenges to us can really
turn out to be gifts in the end and it's
really up to us as you know as a human
species to really think not so much be
in our mind but think with our hearts
and I think there's been already too
much thinking up here
um that's why we're in a situation that
we are in right now and where we really
need to start moving into is into the
the mind of the heart and uh you know in
my book I share a little story about an
elder that told us the longest journey
that we will ever travel is between our
mind and our heart and that's only 18
inches away you know and so I think that
that's kind of some of the things that
are that are coming up for me
um you know I'm reminded of many stories
that even my my grandparents and
great-grandparents shared and that were
passed down through our oral Traditions
about how things evolve and the way that
we look at what perceive things is
really what we create and so
um you know I think one of the things
that I see for myself is that the
children that are being born in this
time they're very
um I think you know I think Chris calls
them Paul calls it the diamond in his
book makes a reference to a diamond and
I I think of these children as very wise
Souls that are coming in right now they
already have this knowing
um that is within them to carry on a lot
of these teachings and cultures and
traditions that we all have forgotten
about because we've kind of been too
focused on the materialistic aspects of
our lives and we've forgotten everything
else and so I think you know I'm a
little bit more optimistic that it's
just an evolution and a change in a
shift that we are going through as a as
Humanity there will definitely be those
that will I think falter off on another
path
um I I think one of the things I'm also
reminded of in part of the chapter that
Chris writes that reminds me of is that
there are these different things that
are evolving and psychedelics these
sacred plant medicines allows us to go
into these places
that are different timelines than this
physical timeline that we are in and
um we all have our own interpretation of
what that is you know I mean I've seen
the future I've seen the
um the the instruments for healing um
that have been shared by our star
relatives you know in our my cultures
they said that we are
um the star beings we are from the Stars
our ancestors are from the stars and we
were remembering those things
um but I've also seen the ancient runes
and the dwellings
um crafted on side of the walls in many
of my my Journeys you know and being
able to travel into time time frames
um it's very hard to describe these
timelines that you're able to to tap
into to have those connections with you
know deceased relatives and really you
know heal those relationships that we
have with one another so that we can
continue to evolve I I think some of
that is related to some of the things
that Chris talks about is about this
evolution of karma and so one of the
things that I think that and I my prayer
is that as each one of us sees what's
happening and unfolding around us in in
the world whether it's geopolitical or
climate related really start to begin I
ask ourselves you know what part of that
do I own I think there's always this
tendency to say that somebody else's
issue but we all have if we really truly
believe that we are interrelated with
one another then we need to take
ownership of that that's really where
the real action happens so thank you for
that question
yeah my absolutely my pleasure and you
know I think it's I I love what you said
and I've heard it before that the
longest journey we'll ever take is the
one from our head to our heart and I I
repeat that fact because I think it's
really important and I want everyone to
you know really think about that for a
moment and really recognize like are you
living from up here it's another quote
that I have in my world that's like when
you're in your head you're dead when
you're in your heart you're smart you
know and uh it's just one of those
things that when you drop into your
heart all of a sudden answers come
you know undammed and flow really well
so thank you for I might borrow that
Mark by the way by all means yeah
absolutely lots of trading going on here
there you go there you go well this this
is one of the ways that psychedelics are
helping change the world right we learn
we support we get inspired by each other
and then we can go share what we're
doing and all based on the topic of
psychedelics anyways Chris again that
would be our question for you
um you know what is the transition you
see that we are facing as a society
today
well I only have limited Visionary
shamanic kind of experience of the
future
when I want to turn to specifics I have
to go to the same sources that we all do
I have to go to the scientist I have to
go to the ecologist I was very glad
Stephen that you mentioned the work of
Dwayne Elgin because he's been crunching
the numbers for decades he's been really
tracking the the scientific literature
and it seems clear if we do that
we are entering a period of enormous
suffering it is hard to overestimate
how much suffering is coming in the
decades ahead between now and say just
say 50 years from now 2070 2075.
when we look at The Melting of the ice
caps when we look at the expanding
population when we look at climate
destabilization destabilization of
Agriculture likelihood of and more
pandemics I mean
realistically we could be looking at the
death of one-third to one-half of the
human population of this planet if our
carrying capacity is somewhere around 2
billion and we're pushing 8 billion now
then
foreign
the suffering of so many of our children
and grandchildren around the world dying
is just going to be an unspeakable Agony
that's going to bring us to our knees
and give us a kind of
intense incentive a motivation to do
things to insist on changes that right
now we do not have the political and
social will to do some do a few do a
growing number of some do but not enough
to make these shifts happen
so I think we're coming into a pain of
terrible terrible suffering I wish it
weren't so I wish we could we could
avoid it by having enough people come to
their senses quickly enough but I think
we're past the point in history where we
could avert this crisis that is coming
we might be able to soften a touch but
it's coming and it's going to hit us
it's going to hit our children and our
grandchildren our great-grandchildren
very very hard
now
my Visionary experience is that this
Global crisis that we are entering
is a birth process
that it it is going to be horrendously
painful but it is not an apocalypse in
the sense of a destruction of everything
that has come up to this point in time
it it is it is in a sense
like a near-death experience where we
come very close to death and in that
process of coming close to death we
break through into different orders of
Consciousness I think Nate and this is
not something human beings are doing or
human beings are in control of nature is
in control of this process nature is
driving this evolutionary crisis the the
this intelligence behind nature is
driving this process the best we can do
is be responsive in communion with this
intelligence responsive with this
intelligence and cooperate with it in
order to facilitate a transition that it
is not ours to have design but nature
has designed this transition
now the way I understand the long scale
of this is from within a reincarnational
perspective
and from that perspective
the human beings who are entering this
crisis are not human beings the way we
ordinarily think of them
they're not 100 year old beings
they're tens of thousands hundreds of
thousands of year old beings they have
layers and layers and layers of the
history inside of each one of us and
this history comes from different
cultures and different places around the
world in different places in society
different colors different religious
Traditions all these aspects of our
Global complex picture are all woven
into the fiber of our being we have been
growing
for hundreds of thousands of years as
Souls making some progress here maybe
making some step backwards there but
overall we've been growing but
collectively
this psychological level
of our Collective maturation is still
basically egoic it's still rooted in our
individual Consciousness and the world
that is falling apart around our ears is
a world that was built by ego and is and
I don't just disparage ego ego is
beautiful I mean it it's just it's an
extraordinarily beautiful
phenomenon but it is still fundamentally
cut off from the deeper fabric of life
from the deeper fabric of our
interconnectedness from the deeper
fabric of our spiritual connectedness
and basically it's it because of its
limited awareness
it designs a world which works for some
and doesn't work for others it elevates
the condition of life for some at the
cost of disparaging the the quality of
life of other beings and we can just we
know how this happens we know how this
works we know what's been happening and
basically this is a world that works for
some and doesn't work for others and
it's a world
the limitations of this view are
basically leading to a global
destruction a global catastrophe of
unmitigated suffering
I don't think we can survive as a
species living out of the level of
Consciousness that we have been living
out of up to this point in time for all
its beauty the ego is still too small a
Consciousness to basically solve the
global problems to solve the social
problems that that are becoming
Paramount right now we either need to we
will either grow up
or we're going to die and that makes
this death process a tremendously
powerful evolutionary accelerator now
what growing up means I think is
shifting from an egoic perspective to a
soul perspective basically I think we
are in a time when all of our farmer
lives and all of this history and all of
this work that each one of us has been
doing and collectively we've been doing
I think what's happening is just as the
world is coming together as one our
psyches are coming together as one the
prophecies that Melinda refers to as
East-West culture north-south culture
but the psyche is coming together as one
and when this when we reach critical
mass not only will the world give birth
to a new culture
but the core of this culture I think is
that it will be operating out of a
different level of Consciousness out of
a higher level of Consciousness and I
think the most immediate way of
understanding this is out of Soul
Consciousness and this is what
in my Visions comes through as the birth
of the diamond Soul which is simply all
of our history integrated into a single
Consciousness which is transparent to
each other at a very deep level and
transparent to the Divine at a very deep
level and once we collectively make this
transition it's not going to work if
only a few people here or there make
this transition nature doesn't think
small nature only thinks in large large
movements the entire species is being
taken through this transition and I
don't know how we're going to make this
transition I don't know whether it's
going to come slowly or fast or how
we're going to do it
but the Visions which have been poured
into me in my years of psychedelic work
is that we do make this transition we do
come out of this crisis a different kind
of species not only improved a little
bit around the edges but with a
fundamental change taking place at the
very core of the collective unconscious
so that every human being born after
this transition takes place is operating
out of a different Foundation of
Consciousness a different more
spiritually informed form of
Consciousness and just as any mother
when she
goes into labor is in a day filled with
pain but at the end of the day when she
gives birth to her child that pain is
worth it because of the beauty of the
child that's being born I think it will
be that way for us too we are giving
birth to a new form of humanity a more
enlightened form a more compassionate
form a more spiritually awakened form of
humanity historically unprecedented and
as this transition takes place we will
look back at this Century Of Crisis and
we will say it was worth it to give
birth to something so beautiful
it was worth it
[Music]
Mark can I um add a little icing on that
cake absolutely you can Stephen thanks
well uh that was incredible Chris by the
way mind-blowing really
um uh and I I just like to throw in
um one of my favorite sayings necessity
is the mother of invention and I think
that the intelligence I don't think I
I'm sure the intelligence uh uh
capabilities of humanity
um often as you've just implied I think
Chris uh in concert
um with each other are all but Limitless
and so
um I from my point of view the
optimistic side of this what you're
talking about Chris is a potentially
extremely difficult painful uh period of
um dissolution before there's enough of
a gap for the New Vision to come in
um is going to be in some way tempered
by increasing intelligence uh you know
that it's like life is getting real on
the planet you know
um and as things get real uh our deeper
capabilities start to come out more and
more so I think that's really important
to understand Frank technically and um
and and goes along with what I was
saying earlier about the need for sort
of um uh plausible understandable
actionable uh visions and and messages
for people so that people don't so that
as many people as possible don't just
fall into Despair and hopelessness uh as
material conditions deteriorate if
that's what's going to happen
so yeah I just wanted to add that um uh
you know let us not underestimate and
this is I'm not saying this in
contradiction to anything you've said
Chris but let us not
um underestimate the uh it's almost
unlimited potential for creativity that
is going to become increasingly uh
needed as time goes on and will come out
you know as we move out of the sort of
the you know um uh Hermann hess's last
book the glass bead game Magister Ludy
he uh takes place about 500 years in the
future and he refers back to those
people refer back to this time as the uh
age of fuyaton and I'm not sure if I'm
pronouncing it correctly but it means
paper like it's it's like plastic or
insubstantial or something so there's a
kind of a a frivolousness that dominates
those parts of the world that can afford
to be frivolous at this time which I
think is likely to crumble and more and
more people are going to get real you
know I don't want to ramble too long but
I just want to say as a as a music
person myself
um uh music has been treated in such
shabby ways in recent history and I
think it's going to play an important
role in the future as it be as this
reality process deeper this reality kind
of you know trajectory deepens and and
people will start to increasingly
discover that uh that there's incredible
potential in music that a lot of people
already know but a lot of people have no
idea because of the fact that it's you
know oftentimes people put it on they
don't even barely listen to it or it's
piped into elevators and grocery stores
and all that and just treat it as a kind
of a cheapo commodity to influence the
mood of a situation buy more or whatever
um you know we certainly know that with
um songs like the Peyote prayer songs
and their capability and the ikaros of
the Ayahuasca world and their capability
and such
enough from me
thanks for adding that in Stephen and
and Chris you said something that I
thought was so beautifully said the the
and it was really the metaphor of a
mother giving birth
and that pain
that turns into you know great pleasure
right and it just reminded me of
something that you know it's one thing I
always live by and you know we see great
change coming
and one of our you know care ways of
dealing with changes a lot of people
resist change you know and I want to
encourage everybody to embrace the
change because change is automatic
growth not necessarily but when change
can happen and we can grow and help
others grow and transform through the
pain air quoting uh the pain of change
versus you know the ability to embrace
it as an opportunity because you know
it's gonna suck it's gonna hurt it
happens when change is happening
metamorphosis I gotta believe you know
isn't always you know isn't painless to
the caterpillar in that sense and that
you know we do anything when the change
comes you know let's embrace the change
and grow with it uh based on some of the
things that we've been talking about
here and Belinda I just want to reach
you know touch in with you is there
something you wanted to add to what uh
Chris and Stephen may have said there
yes I think one of the things that's
really important to me and one of the
things that I continue to see in this
space is that we fed we forget about the
importance of spirituality in in this
space you know
um either because we don't understand it
and especially in circles of science
it's very difficult for them to talk
about that when we're talking about
healing for many indigenous cultures
spirituality is actually the number one
component that actually helps to bring
healing and wholeness to an individual
so I think that's one of the things I
also wanted to add and as we start to
move forward in this movement that we be
mindful of that
yeah it really goes hand in hand with
our disconnection to Nature right
and if I can add a footnote to what
Stephen had said
um
I think in my Visionary experience one
of the messages has come through over
and over and over again is the pace of
the future is the pace of the pastors
are relevant to the pace of the Future
these things are going to happen much
faster than we could possibly imagine
much faster faster faster and one of the
ways it was unfolded for me is
a vision of the entire Collective psyche
the the species mind that underlies
Oliver and individual Minds is a field
is a unified field and an under the
pressure of this time in history this
field is going to become hyper
stimulated through all the angst and all
the suffering and all the uncertainty
it's going to become hyper simulated and
when it becomes hyper stimulated it'll
begin to function in what chaos thinkers
would call a non-linear system it'll
become a non-linear system or far from
equilibrium system non-linear systems
are capable of doing things that linear
systems cannot do and one of the things
they can do is change rapidly change
quickly small fluctuations of input can
produce dramatic outputs so the
butterfly flaps its wings and China can
produce a hurricane across the world so
that means that under the pressure of
the future
the contribution of individuals the
influence of individuals will not be
diminishing it'll be increasing so that
individuals can affect the outcome of
this evolutionary transition more in the
future than they were in the past and
it's just through this and through many
other ways the speed with which things
can change the creativity and when
non-linear systems evoke from deeper
within its nature latent forms of
creativity that are part of the natural
fabric but had not been actualized up to
that point in time so I think Steven's
absolutely right the creativity of the
universe is going to be manifesting the
collectivity the interconnectivity of
our beings of our hearts and of our
minds I think we're entering into the
time one of the ways of thinking about
where we're come what we're coming into
is we're entering into the period of the
one heart where Humanity will have will
experience the one heart and once we
know the one heart in our Essence then
we won't hurt each other we won't
satisfy we won't let anybody
be diminished in their opportunities of
life and I think we are Awakening into
the one heart and I think that you're
talking about making the journey from
mind to heart is a very powerful
um
mentioning of this
may I Mark you may Stephen thank you oh
Chris another beautiful statement thanks
so much
um uh yeah I want to add in another
thing on the sort of um uh optimism side
you might say uh excuse me um and this
is another one of those little aphorisms
which has come to me in a variety of
ways but this particular aphorism is uh
there I think it's Victor Hugo said that
there um uh there is nothing as powerful
as an idea whose time has come and uh
canuckus Little Fish a road man from the
Native American church that I sat up in
meetings with perhaps two dozen times or
more over a 12-year period others have
said this too
probably many actually but what Ken said
to me one time or canucka said to me one
time was that he and some others had
been having a a vision that
as the stability or um you know
believable
believability plausibility of the
current uh spiritually disconnected as
Chris says egoic dominated
um system uh becomes less and less
plausible less and less viable than um
that will create a gap that is creating
a gap but the Gap will widen or become
big enough for this new vision to come
in and that new vision will make sense
you know as Terence McKenna who I think
borrowed this from William Blake or
somebody ultimately and reworded it for
modern times was if the truth can be
told
so as to be understood it will be
believed which is essentially what
Dwayne is saying Elgin is saying in his
chapter as well so um I think it's
again from the sort of like I'm giving
people hope perspective it's important
to realize again that we're not just
looking at destruction uh it's the birth
it's the death rebirth part of it right
that's so important yeah
great well thank you for adding on to
that Stephen now we are getting near a
time we want to be mindful because
sometimes people don't like the the long
episodes of things so if there's one
thing I like to do is I always like to
give people something tangible or a call
to action and I know we've talked about
a lot of great ideas and things that
people can do
um but I I'd like to ask each of you
specifically that if there was one thing
someone can do
to help this transition along for
Humanity as a call to action as an
individual what would you suggest or
think that might be the the most
um you know uh bear the most fruit what
do you think the most important action
for all of us to do is moving forward
whoever wants to go first go ahead go
first um I got a quote canuckus little
fish again
um who said to us in the teepee a couple
of times relatives stay behind the
medicine
so it's a metaphor essentially
um uh Stephen Herod buner in his book
plant intelligence and the imaginal
realm used as the phrase following the
golden thread which you and I have been
having fun with the last couple of years
Mark
um so that's the getting in front of the
medicine as a as in a reality in reality
but also as a as a metaphor is the ego
getting in the way and enforcing its
agenda and its needs onto the situation
staying behind the medicine as I
understand it is has to do with um uh
quieting the Mind calming the mind being
humbling oneself dropping down into the
heart as people have said so beautifully
Belinda and Chris to today
dropping down into the heart and
experiencing through that way and just
following the golden thread I think it's
a very optimistic in a sense way of
looking at our potential so or or to put
it into more sort of a fun way
um
um excuse me uh uh uh the wonderful
novelist Tom Robbins in his book Fierce
invalid's home from hot climates uh told
a story about a friend of his who had a
a like a parakeet or some large you know
bird that uh was the first thing any
visitor to the place all we saw when the
person walked in the door here's this
thing sitting on a stand and it said to
everybody the parrot's name was sailor
by the way sailor the parrot and
everyone who came in through the store
it said people loves the world relax
so so if there's one sort of simple
message it's like relax pay attention
and trust and stay behind the medicine
and then
um I I think you know at least I'd like
to believe that things unfold in the in
and of themselves and we then know the
next intelligent skillful step to take
um uh Mark before we go are you gonna is
one of us going to say something about
the book launch
oh you're not there yet okay okay didn't
mean to jump again I'm always jump in
the gun oh well I didn't know if this
was my last time to say anything for the
day or not it's never your last time oh
yes always just one more thing
okay anyway Stephen that's that's
fantastic I I completely can relate to
what you're saying and Belinda what do
you think you know for people to do one
thing leave here from this conversation
and do one thing that can make a
difference in this world what yeah
thank you for that question mark you
know one of the things at the very end
of my chapter I end with a prayer for
healing of humanity and I think one of
the best things that we each can do is
look internal to ourselves and do the
work that we are being called to because
with that then it resonates out into our
families our communities and then
globally just like
um you know Chris had talked a little
bit about it's just like that Pebble in
the pawn to really get out there and do
something
um you know get involved look for
practice sacred activism you know look
for those opportunities where you can
help your neighbors you can help your
community I think with all of that said
and done you know it helps to for us to
evolve into a better place
very well said and I like that you
talked about you know that the
contribution and volunteerism because I
think that that's just a powerful way
that people can get outside of
themselves and you know serve the
greater good so thank you for bringing
that uh to the surface Belinda I think
it's really important
and Chris you're up all right well in
addition to doing our inner work that
Belinda referred to in addressing the
Shadow and taking responsibility for our
own shadow
um I'd like to sort of broaden the
perspective now I think Stephen's right
that music is going to play a very
important role in the time that we're
coming into and not just musicians but
artists uh politicians scientists every
it's going to take all of us working in
concert to bring about this social
transformation and to help us make this
shift so I would just
invite us to remember
that before we were born
and before children were born every one
of us knew what we were getting into
before we were born we all made a
conscious choice to be born in this time
into this place in this particular form
in this particular sex and this
particular culture we were born and we
chose to become an active participant in
this historical process and no matter
what I might recommend in terms of the
good thing for someone to do or a core
thing for someone to do inevitably I
would reflect my own limitations of my
own spot in the world
and I think what's important for each
one of us to remember
that we have already buried around us
all the help that we need all the
information we need all the resources
that we need to do our particular piece
in contributing to this transformation
that we are a part of the question is
not what do we need to do
the question is I think will we have the
courage to do what is ours to do you
will know what is ours to do
will we have the courage to do it and
everybody has the courage to do their
particular part
then we're going to make it through this
thing
I really like that that that courage to
to push through that Chris I think it's
you know so spot-on as so many people
kind of stand on the sidelines never
play in the game they're just watching
it right and I think it's it's really
important and if there's one thing I
wanted to add in terms of just a a call
to action from from my perspective and
it I think about a conversation I had
with Donnie Blakey uh who I know Stephen
knows quite well I don't know Belinda if
you knew Donnie
um before he passed but he was just a
brilliant guy and he said something to
me and without the
huge story of where he
um you know what it was but the the most
important thing he says was
it was about having others you know
having your best interest at heart not
our interest kind of like what Stephen
was saying about being behind the
medicine and put other people's best
interests in your heart as well not what
you can get out of them or or do and
really respect appreciate understand the
other person's world because so many
people are going through you know trials
and tribulations of life right now and
what we need is more understanding you
know compassion non-judgment where we
can actually put other people's best
interests at heart and and not our own
and and I think that you know that has a
huge potential to change the way people
interact in this world and where they're
at so you know that's really you know
you don't know where other people are at
so who are we to you know judge complain
criticize condemn any of those things
and when we step back in a position of
love acceptance appreciation of where we
are all at on our journey it can really
make a difference because I know there's
people out there that don't hear kind
words very often and we have the ability
to impact people with their words and
our actions so and I think Marky met
understanding not understanding yes yes
thank you Belinda yes I did
that's a good one I'm gonna have to get
used to using that one because it's
super powerful well I want to thank you
all three of you for for being part of
our conversation today it's always an
honor I I learned so much and I get
inspired as well and I know that uh you
know Steven's book is out it's available
and we're actually having a book launch
here at St James Hall in Vancouver so
maybe Steven you can talk a little bit
about that we're pretty excited we're
getting close sure so um anyone who can
walk Drive bicycle train boat or fly to
Vancouver we'd love to have you with us
on the evening ending of April 7th which
is by the way we didn't know this when
we set this date with St James Hall but
it happens to be good Friday which is an
interesting uh coincidence you might say
or perhaps synchronicity so at the very
least it's going to be a small G Good
Friday a good Friday
um uh excuse me and and we've been Mark
you and I have been talking about it not
book launch almost sounds a little bit I
don't know academic or Library like or
dry or something like that but really
we're painting it as a as a an
empowering celebration that in uh you
know in my highest ideal idealized
vision of what this could be we bring
people together we talk we don't talk a
lot Dennis McKenna has volunteered to
come in and say a few words I've been
trying to talk Belinda into coming up
but it's a long way and she's got other
things to do
um uh um and you know I'd love to have
some more of the contributors around but
they're all far flung so Dennis is our
is our more local person who's consented
but we're not going to talk long and
then we're going to go directly into one
of our frequently done in the past
cannabis friendly or well call it a
cannabis ceremony but we like to call it
a cannabis friendly ceremony because
you're certainly not required to you
know imbibe any cannabis and the
ceremony itself will be equally maybe
not equally but you know quite decently
powerful and effective as a meditation
ceremony whether you you know imbibe any
cannabis or not and then we will follow
that well I'll hang out in a corner and
sign some books if people want me to but
other than that um our wonderful world
musician shine Edgar in his um and his
uh incredibly talented
multi-instrumental percussionist Curtis
Andrews are going to do an hour or so of
dance music which is you know it's
almost impossible not to dance to the
shine's music you really have to be
stuck in your chair to get to not want
to dance to shine so what I'm hoping to
do cannabis in that way you know when we
haven't talked about cannabis as part of
this discussion particularly but I you
know if we had more time in or in
another context uh I I I would want to
talk about how cannabis has an important
role to play in all this because of its
sort of gentle ubiquity and when
understood properly
um uh it can be considered the sacrament
of Peace but it allows people to have
visions and deepening of experience in a
way that's quite functional in a
situation like 150 people at St James
Hall you know you don't want to be
handing out two dried grams of mushrooms
to 150 people in that kind of
circumstance right but cannabis you can
do quite safely especially with the kind
of guidance that we give them in the
container that we hold for them so um my
vision My Hope Is that that is an
empowering thing as well as a
celebratory thing so we highly uh and
strongly encourage people to come and
join us for that um
and uh
um so there's some Mark do you want to
talk about how they can get info and
details absolutely but I just want to
add to that as like shine and Curtis are
incredible and I know Chris Bass you
know that and Belinda if you were there
on Saturday night at the conference oh
you missed out on a special treat so
I'll get you some music for it there but
oh my God incredible incredible
experience so uh just grateful for that
and yeah you can get if you go to
spiritplantmedicine.com events you'll
see a link there
um where you can get uh register your
tickets got all sorts of information
there's a couple little videos and music
you can sample on and uh right now until
uh April what is it's 14 March 17th till
March 17th March 17th we're offering a
30 discount for anybody who wants to
join us an early bird ticket
um and that's going for another few days
so if you're watching live or after the
fact uh now is the time to to save on
that and we look forward to really
having a great evening of you know
Community Connection
ceremony some medicine for those who are
interested and of course some epic music
and dance with curves and shine it's
just really incredible
so if there's any last words anybody
would like to share before we wrap it up
because I'm going to play a little video
of of the event that's a minute as we
close off but uh Belinda and Chris if
there's anything you'd like to add we'd
love to to just have you send us off
no thank you thank you for this
conversation it's been really beautiful
thank you
and likewise thank you and uh Stephen
thank you for your vision to bring
together all the voices that you brought
together in the book and for everything
that you do and you and Mark do to
facilitate Community around the
Awakening of our time in history thank
you very much okay well and I would like
to thank um uh well Mark for you know
Mark for you being so supportive of all
this you know for one thing and Belinda
and Chris for being so generous and
giving your time for this as well
um and really I I'm not exaggerating
both of both of you the things that
you've said today I've just really
touched me they're been really brilliant
so thanks a lot for that and thank you
for your kind words everyone and Stephen
you know it's just one way of me just
sharing the message I'm all about how do
we transform Our Lives what are the
tools what works and the medicine
brought me to this and so I'm just here
to help you know these great Visionary
and Indigenous voices speak out it's
what I want to be part of supporting for
a change in the world and this is one of
the vehicles uh that I believe is very
powerful to do that so I'm just honored
to be able to share space share time and
and help everybody share their message
so thank you so much
and with that being said I'm gonna play
a little video here as we sign off uh
just a little bit about the event and
what's going on and the you'll get to
sample a little bit of music so here we
go
thanks again everyone
please do not underestimate how deep we
can go individually and collectively
with this and I say that from experience
[Music]
foreign
thank you all for joining us that's just
a little teaser and a taste but if you
go to the website and take a look
there's a 10 minute version of that
whole soundtrack that shine and Curtis
were playing that you can go enjoy
because it's it's really quite epic so
thanks again everyone until next time
have a great day everyone bye
thank you